<meta>
{
    "title": "Online Education Comparison",
    "tags": ["professional development", "learning web development"]
}
</meta>

# Online Education Comparison

I think that every web developer should be subscribed to some kind of online education site, so that they can regularly hone their skills and keep up to date on all the newest technologies out there. And while something can be said for learning on your own, through shotgunned google searches (since let’s be honest, that’s our unwritten job description), I feel having more structured tools to learning about development is essential. Even those who claim to have mastered their workflow (because they’ve gotten very good at finding exactly what to google) still know that their workflow can change on a dime. New technologies come out every month, and while most are a flash in the pan, others stick around. With new technologies comes a lot of learning to do. There is no shame in having a helping hand as far as learning the ropes on anything new. Every developer should feel comfortable enough with feeling uncomfortable with new technology. They should be able to learn new tools quickly, and online education platforms are a great tool for doing just that. I feel that video tutorials are by far the best way to learn and keep up with new entries in the grand catalog of development tools. So with all that being said, which education platform should we use?

I’m going to give two answers to that question. The first is Treehouse. The second is Lynda. These two online education sites have extensive libraries for development, are not particularly expensive, and are overall are just fantastic for learning on your own. But these two tools are vastly different from each other, and while they are both my favorites, they do not necessarily fall into the same levels of experience. So let’s start with Treehouse.

Treehouse is a site made specifically with web development and design in mine. It’s courses are tailored towards its users wanting to learn more about how the web works, and how they can add their own pieces to this field. It’s courses are combinations of videos, quizzes, and exercises, alternating regularly within each course. This gives the user a great experience of hearing what is being said, and then immediately putting it to practice, rather than just taking notes lecture-style. Their library has a vast array of different languages, including most tools a web developer might need. Treehouse also includes a great tool called “Tracks”. These are a collection of courses that a student would need to take in order to achieve a certain goal. For example, they have a “Front End Development Track”, which goes through the basics of HTML and CSS, all the way to being able to create a custom WordPress theme. And while the track is obviously not exhaustive (I don’t think in today’s world that just a few courses can make you into a professional developer), it’s a way to show people who know little or nothing the right direction to move in order to become proficient.

In addition to this wonderful collection of courses, Treehouse has a social aspect to it. Each user gets badges and points when they complete some coursework. This seems like something small but I do have to say that I have stuck around for an extra hour once in a while just to see my points go up a little. These badges also give you a breakdown of what percentages you’ve applied in your learning to what languages. Your little “pizza pie” of colors is a quick visual to see what languages you’ve learned so far. Treehouse also has a forum where you can post questions relating to coursework, which are often answered by other students or Treehouse moderators. I’ve found that any question I’ve had often had been asked before, and that the answer is just a click away from any video.

This is not a comprehensive list of Treehouse’s features, but I will say that I was impressed by this education platform that I stumbled across about a year ago through a banner ad. However Treehouse does have some shortcomings. These may be things to consider before picking up a subscription.

Treehouse has a very child-like design philosophy behind it. From the way that the site is designed to the courses themselves, I couldn’t help feeling like a kid again, and not really in a great way. It seems like “Nick Jr.” for Web Developers at times. The way that the site is laid out with flat design is one thing, but the presentation by Treehouse instructors is quite another. I’ll just say it: the acting and scripts for Treehouse are pretty bad. While I’m sure/ I know that the instructors know a ton about the coursework they are showcasing, the way in which they talk about it makes me feel like I’m being patronized. It’s not a very professional way to show web development. Even some of the examples that the user gets to build-along with instructor are child-like. While the development principle of an ecommerce solution with PHP is important, do I really need to build a t-shirt site for a talking frog to prove it? It seems like a small thing, but when you’ve spent a lot of time watching their videos, it definitely can become annoying.

Another downfall of Treehouse is that their library is lacking in some of the cutting edge areas. There have been a fair number of times that I’ve looked up a certain tool, like Angular, or MongoDB, only to find that they offer few or even no courses on the subject. Other times I’ve looked up technologies, like Laravel, I’ve been met with a course that is grossly out of date, being a whole iteration behind the current version. I’d say that these occasions are few and far between, but definitely become more apparent when you become a more advanced developer. So if you’re a beginner to a base language, it’s great. Otherwise, you might find that Treehouse is not for you.

This is not to say that Treehouse is bad. As I said, it’s one of my favorites. But I did recently pause my account, simply because I felt I learned all I could/ wanted to from their current library of courses (but it did take a very long time). But let’s move on to Lynda, and see what they offer.

Lynda.com is also an online education platform, but instead of being based solely on developers, they offer courses across, well, everything you could hope to learn on a computer. It’s pretty much the heavy hitter when it comes to learning anything online these days. If you haven’t heard of it I’d be surprised.  So if you’re like me and have a few different hobbies based around computers, you can absolutely get a lot of mileage out of Lynda. Their presentation is concise and professional. Their list of videos in a given course are laid out conclusively so that a user can see each step they will take in learning. They also show how long each and every video is, which makes it much easier to watch if you’re on a budgeted time.

I’ve found that that their instructors can be hit or miss. Some might just have a voice that isn’t that fun to listen to for extended periods of time. For example, a lot of their JavaScript courses are taught by Ray Villalobos. And while Ray is definitely talented and has taught me a lot, a radio voice he has not.

While Treehouse’s catalog seems to peter out once the more advanced topics are searched, Lynda seems to not have that problem. I haven’t had an issue yet with finding something I was looking for. Their courses don’t have an aspect of interactivity to them, with exercise files to follow along only given to pro members. And while that might seem like a bad thing, it isn’t all the time. I’ve been able to kick back on the couch and watch some how-to’s without being worried about having to follow along. Sometimes it’s good to just get a straight lecture. Sometimes it’s not. It sort of depends on how you want to learn. But the option for getting the exercise files only as a pro member is annoying. Most of the time you can follow along just fine, but it gets rid of an extra layer of structure to the content that others might like.

There also isn’t as much of a level of connectivity between courses. You have to know what you want to learn in order to progress. If you learn JSON, then you’ll need to know that you should learn AJAX next. It’s hard to beat their catalog but sometimes it’s hard to figure out what you should watch next

Overall, I’d say Lynda is a totally solid alternative to Treehouse for developers, if you feel too advanced for Treehouse’s library. That is currently the place I’m in right now, and it’s definitely working for me.

To finish up, I’d like to say that I’m sure that there are other learning tools out there that are great, and it’s much more important to find something that works for you, rather than just listening to what someone else says online. But as someone who usually has to google problems I can’t solve, it’s nice to have a more structured format for learning and brushing up on development. To me, that is indispensable.