<meta>
    {
        "tags": ["writing", "blog", "javascript", "itsablog"],
        "title": "The Thoughts Behind ItsABlog"
    }
</meta>
# The Thoughts Behind ItsABlog

I've always loved the idea of having a blog. If you're a developer like me, you probably spend a good portion of your day reading other people's thoughts, opinions, articles, and code snippets on blogs all over the web. The reason I got into writing code in the first place was trying to do what someone else could do. "Look at this guy, he made a cool navigation menu". "Hey, this guy built out his own node server". Building things and comparing your work to that of others is something that is just going to happen in life, and especially in this industry. I love this. It makes me want to do more stuff. Often, it makes me learn that I want to do things that I had no idea about until I saw someone else do it.

The same is true for a blog. If step one of learning programming is learning to write code by reading what other people wrote, probably one of the more intermediate steps is actually writing those ideas yourself. It's an appealing thought right? Having gotten through the gauntlet of learning what exactly a CSS preprocessor is, or how to set up an SSL cert on a new server, or whatever collection of gizmos and gadgets you currently have on your machine to build cool things, you now want to bestow onto others what you have learned, just as you had when you were in their less experienced shoes. Here's the problem though: *setting up a blog sucks*.

So every person that has ever tried to start up some sort of regular writing experience, whether it's a book, a blog, a series of essays, whatever, they will most likely talk about how sticking to it can be a chore some times. Writer's block is something that is common parlance. So is just being lazy. The act of getting your thoughts out there is already a challenging one, and will made even more so if you have to fight your tools along the way. I live every day inside of a code editor. I'm used to dealing with text. I'm used to having that text do magical things for me, and have something pop out that's perfect and functional (bugs never happen, shhh). So when I've tried to set up blogs in the past, I've always gotten annoyed at this step: "Great! I just set up my own site, and now I can add a blog... by setting up wordpress. Crap, should this be it's own subdomain? It is PHP after all. Hmm... but I want to show the title of this article on my home page". Inspiration to write something cool quickly turns into going through an exercise in a tech stack that you're less familiar with, or trying to think through how this should be set up.

As I've started to work more, I've really come to adopt the strategy of getting as few things as possible in the way of me doing what I like. I want to do lots of things, quickly, and pretty well, and have them be improved later if they need to be improved. Having a B+ side project now is often better than an A project in 8 weeks. On top of that, I want to be reminded of things that I should be doing. A common tip guitarists give for learning to play guitar, is to never put your guitar in a case when you're home. Get a stand, put it in the middle of your living room. Have it staring at you as you walk by. You'll feel guilty when you don't pick it up every now and then. If I have a project called "blog" staring at me within my codebase, I'll definitely notice it.

All this thinking made me want to make something to make my dumb idea of writing dumb ideas easier for me. ItsABlog is built for the developers who just want to add some blog posts to their site. I don't need a database. I don't need user accounts. I don't need all the stuff that a normal CMS comes with. I just need text. I just _want_ text. I live in text, as I'm guessing a lot of you do too. I want to write text. I want that to become a page on a website. I don't want to have to think much about it. I want it to be source controlled like everything else I do in my waking life. I want JSON, I know how to deal with that. Sure, maybe there's a few cool features I'd want to have here or there, tagging certain posts, showing when a post was written. If you agree with any of this, go ahead and take a look at the project on GitHub. Hopefully it can get your ideas out there a little bit easier.
