<meta>
{
    "title": "What is Good Enough to Get Out The Door",
    "tags": ["professional development", "agile"]
}
</meta>

# What is Good Enough to Get Out The Door?

You've heard the mantra. "Give a hundred and ten percent today". It's common on football fields, or in sales meetings. But what exactly does it mean? I think some people take it to literally mean I need to do more than I've ever done today, which is probably the most innocent take on the meaning. Others will take it to mean I want exactly 10% more than you are possibly able of doing. What exactly does 10% of effort mean? It's something that isn't empirical. I can't exactly put effort in a test tube. And not only are we just assigning value to an abstract concept, we're saying that whatever that value is, it needs to be more than what's possible.

I get why people say it, it's to inspire people to do their best, which is often more than what they thought was their best. But inspirational idioms do not make a great product. Let me propose my system of getting things done. I shoot for 80 percent, I'll often settle for 70. Of what, you might ask. Feature value from development. I know I know, I just said that it's annoying to have to hear an empirical value assigned to something intangible, but just like with the above "stick-to-itiveness"-esque saying, it's more of a concept than a measurement. Let's look at an example.

Let's say that your product owner says that the team should build out a new contact section for a page in your web app. The initial pitch is to try and see how effective these forms are, and to increase contact rates over just having a link to an info email address. The idea is to build out a modal that will include a contact form, and that will prevent scrolling while open, should be responsive, and should include an overlay that uses a blur filter to change any content behind it. On its own, it's not a super difficult feature to implement. There is probably even a library out there to do it. But in the world of professional development, especially agile, you often won't have just this one thing to worry about. You'll have a stack of stories that need to be completed before the next release, and this is just one of many. I'd argue that if the purpose is to have a way to improve contact information, maybe just building out a simple contact page, or section on pages that you want people to get in touch with you from. If it can answer the question as no, it's not more effective, that might answer the question enough to know not to invest more work into this project, or it could say the opposite and have you work out the heavier feature set at a later time.

It's quite common however, for developers to not have a say in their project roadmap. They are told things that should be getting built, and their job is to execute. But I would argue that it is the duty of an expert to voice opinion on a feature set that he or she would be building. It might be the case that whoever is calling the shots just doesn't know possible alternatives to solutions. I guarantee that most product owners are looking for the best bang for their buck. And if their hired expert tells them, "Why do X, when we can do Y in half the time and get nearly all the results" they might just listen. Every work situation is different, but if you are in a healthy environment, alternative that save time and money should always be pitched.

This line of thinking is not an excuse to cut corners. I'm sure many of you know first hand the disasterous implications of not writing unit tests, of cutting features for the sake of time, or packing them in at the expense of maintainability. The important thing is to be conscientious of the time spent getting things done, and thinking of a bigger picture. It's actually often more intensive thinking, because planning is much less of a list of todo's, and instead a more meta-map of possible things to get done, each one worthy of compromise. Just understand that as a developer, your time is expensive. Software costs money to get to production, and giving users, stake holders, future code maintainers the best value per hour is invaluable in this industry.
