<meta>
    {
        "tags": ["professional development", "side project"],
        "title": "Zen and the Art Of Side Projects"
    }
</meta>
# Zen and the Art Of Side Projects

How many of you have been here before? You just had a cool idea. You want to build this cool idea. You figured it could be something fun to work on late at night, on saturday mornings. You want to take a breath at the end and go "Ah, look at what I've done. Here's my doo-hickie". Or maybe you just learned a new technology, and you're dying to try it out. You're trying to find an idea that could be good to have this new technology made with. You also want to stand at the end with some accomplishment, and say "well, here's something I did, and I learned a lot while doing this". I think these are the two main reasons for side projects: Wanting to build an idea, or wanting to learn through building.

Building stuff is fun right? You're a developer, a programmer, a web engineer. Your job is to make things. You're a builder. And while building and solving tiny problems is fun for you, having something that you can show off is always appealing. Well, with the two scenarios above in mind, how many of your side projects have ended in incomplete garbage, things that's you've left by the wayside for months, unfinished, never to be touched again. You spent 20 hours setting up a build and everything, but now you're just... done with it. For one reason or another. Sucks doesn't it? Kind of feels like you did a ton of work, and yet at the end feel bad about it. Well, I've been there too. A lot. I'm pretty sure that I have a few Digital Ocean droplets out there right now that are just idly running, with half finished code on them. I have a bunch of domain names I've bought with the intention of this "really being the time I'm going to finish something". And then it doesn't happen. And then I feel like crap.

Anyway, here's a list of advice that I've learned, and I've started completing way more projects since keeping these things in mind

1) K.I.S.S (Keep it Scoped, Stupid)

You have big dreams, big aspirations. I get it. You want to change the world. You probably won't today. Sorry to be the bearer of bad news. In fact, you probably won't tomorrow either. This shouldn't get you down, it should be a bit of a relief. Because you don't HAVE to change the world today. Think about what you could get done in a day of straight work. If you're like me, you have these bursts from time to time, where you work 20 hours developing and get something... well small. Workable, cool, but smaller than what you originally hoped.

You need to be conservative with your estimation sometimes, especially with side projects. They should at a bare minimum be more enjoyable than work. Ideally they should even be fun. But if your idea is going to take 100 hours, and you realize how drained you feel after a long day of work, and if you have plans this Saturday, you'll start to get annoyed at yourself for not tackling your idea (which if you were to be paid to complete would cost thousands of dollars).

Instead, think about a small scope. What can you get done in a short amount of time. Write out the things that you could build today, if you went on an incredible tear. And then put a full stop at the end. It might not be the biggest or shiniest idea in the world, but it'll be a start. An example of this could be like this. You want to build a new social network. A Twitter clone or something. There's 500 things you need to do before you'd call it "done". Even if you did those 500 things, you might never even say it is done. But, today you could build a log in system, maybe even with a simple server. Maybe just the backend. Sweet, write down what it'll take, do it, do it well, throw it in a repo, add tests to it, and some quick docs. You have completed a project. You can use that later. Sure, you might still have your big idea in mind, but for now, you have something to fall back on in case you change your mind and want to do another huge idea later.

Wanting to do something else actually goes into the next piece of advice pretty well

2) The biggest blocker you're going to face is your own boredom

You have other stuff to do. I get it. The difference between work time and free time is that you get to choose what you WANT to do in your free time. If that happens to be your next big project, so be it. But as time goes on, you only get more likely to get bored of a project. Let me repeat that, you're going to get bored. You could be the most ambitious person on the planet, with an idea you're incredibly passionate about. You're still going to get bored. And if you're not making money from that thing that's boring you, you're probably just going to stop doing it. What's the best way to prevent this?

Doing things quickly. If you're in an inspired mood to get things done, the best thing you can do is try to get as much done as possible. Try and get all that you can done while you still have the desire to do so. I'm sure some of you out there are incredibly disciplined workers. I'd like to consider myself one as well. But when you're cutting your own free time to do something, you might want to be conservative with your stick-to-itiveness. And I can say that I've gotten much more projects done by dedicating a small amount of time, and going full force on it.

3) If you're doing something for the first time, it probably won't be good

The second scenario I laid out at the beginning of this article mentioned side projects that are started for the purpose of learning a new technology. It seems like an effective use of time, learning some new language, or tool, and having something useful come out of it. Unfortunately, what often ends up happening is you have some better understanding of whatever it was you were trying to learn, enough to know that what you created sucks. It's common to feel bad about this, like your project was a failure. Instead, think of it in the perspective of knowledge building, rather than project building. The main purpose of this project is to learn, not to have a usable module come out of it. This is obviously a movable scale, as it's common to use new tertiary tools. But just keep in mind that part of learning something new is failing at it again and again. If you want to really create something that you would consider stable, and usable, try building it out of tools you already know. You're much more likely to be satisfied by the end result, even if you feel like you haven't learned too much

4) If you're a beginner, you're going to make a lot of crap

This is kind of an extension of number 3. When you're first starting out in the world of development, you're going to pretty much ONLY have learning projects. You don't know enough to even begin to estimate all of the above. That's ok. Part of being a beginner is making lots of crap, being proud of the crap for a few days, before realizing how poor it actually is. Programming has a high learning curve, and this feeling is that of hiking up it. With lots of time and practice, it does get better, but only if you stick to it. And you're much more likely to stick to it if you're positive about the progress you're making. Keep in mind how much you've been learning, different tools and libraries, stacks and build processes. It can only help in future endeavors.

5) Don't tell people you're going to work on something

If you are in a more social development community, online or otherwise, it might be tempting to tell people about the cool new idea you have. Or that you're in the middle of a cool project. You want to share your experiences. Don't. This isn't for any "they shouldn't know your idea because it's going to change the world" reason. It's more to avoid opinions being made about you. You're likely to start way more projects than finish, and this is normal. But if you talk to people about every single one, they're not going to care when you're talking to them for the 9th time about the "cool thing you're working on", and they're also going to see your projects as something akin to "get rich quick schemes" or "pie in the sky" dreams. Things you talk about but never actually get done. Even if you get half of all the projects you talk about done, would that be something you'd want to talk about regularly? This is obviously a much more nebulous rule than the others, and can vary depending on who you talk to, but it's generally a good idea to just not brag, and if you are going to brag, at least brag over something that you'd consider complete.

To finish

This ended up being a bit more ranty than I would have expected, but I think the important thing that I've learned over the years is that the ability to finish a project is a skill, just like anything else in this industry and in life. And just like everything else, it takes time and practice to get it down well, and even then you'll have slip ups. You're going to make crap. Good! Go make crap. You CAN get a cool module done in a day. It might suck, who cares? No one is giving you deadlines for your side projects. If they are, by definition it shouldn't be a side project. Just go build something today

